Welcome to the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group from Padmasami Ling, Venerable Camperomchis Monastery
and Retreat Center in New York. Today we're discussing their book, "The Buddhist Path",
we're specifically looking at Chapter 20, called "A Device on Visualization".
So we'll begin with our usual opening prayers and then we'll begin the discussion today. Thank you.
[Music]
So Chapter 20 begins on page 97, "Advice on Visualization". I'll give a quick summary of just the
first couple paragraphs of the chapter.
The Venerable Camperomchis begin by saying that for many people it is difficult to maintain
visualization in creation stage Vajrayana practice.
Meditation deities are displays of primordial wisdom, our own natural awareness. They're not solid
or fixed in any way, since your primordial mind is not solid or fixed in any way.
Just keep practicing according to the instructions and gradually your visualization will become
clear.
The famous Turtan Minyar Dorje gave advice on visualization practice, saying that Guru Padmasambh
ava did not always look the way the paintings and statues depicted him.
He can appear in any way that is helpful to others, so we should not only expect him to appear or
behave in only one way, according to our limited conceptions.
There's a famous story about Guru Rinpoche's unrestricted appearance and activities that involves
the great Turtan Ratna Lingpa. Andrew will briefly summarize this story and then we'll discuss the
first topic point.
So in this chapter, Rinpoche explained that Ratna Lingpa was a famous Turtan who lived in the 15th
century, born amidst many different signs and special indications that he was a special child.
He grew up, got married, and lived as a householder.
One day in Tibet, as was common at the time of the village, Ratna Lingpa and many other people were
having a party, but they did archery, singing, dancing, drinking, the Tibetan beer, chong.
So they had a great time. The party went on into the night. Ratna Lingpa, the next day, took his
animals out to pasture.
And at that time he had obtained a text, a special biography of Guru Padmasambhava by Nyangran Nima
Ozer, which he was copying the text because he wanted to use part of the special prayer from that
text in his daily practice.
So he was really tired from all the partying the day before. He fell asleep.
And when he woke up, he felt really fresh and joyful and there was an old man standing in front of
him who had yellow cotton robes on.
So he said, "How could this man be here?" It's almost like he appeared from nowhere.
But the man reached out and he picked up that text that Ratna Lingpa had been reading and said that
, "Oh, this is a biography of Guru Padmasambhava by the great Nyangran."
"Do you have a special feeling of devotion towards Guru Padmasambhava?"
And Ratna Lingpa said, "All my life I felt a special connection to Guru Padmasambhava and had all
kinds of devotion. So that's why I'm copying this. I want to put that in my daily practice."
So this old man said, "Oh, that's wonderful. You're good. This text is really good and you're quite
good too."
So he said, "Do you know where this mountain is around here?" The hovering mountain of the Garuda.
And Ratna Lingpa said, "I don't know that one, but there's this Garuda mountain."
And the old man in the yellow cotton robe said, "Oh, that's the one."
So then he pulled out a special scroll, like a roll of paper from his chuba, and he gave that to
Ratna Lingpa.
And he said, "Open this." And Ratna Lingpa read that, and it described Ratna Lingpa by name,
including even marks on his body for telling that he would be a great terminal revealer.
So Ratna Lingpa was so surprised. He said, "This can be about me." But it was.
So he was so happy. And he said, "Can I copy this?" And the old man said, "No, you keep that. That
's for you."
So anyway, Ratna Lingpa invited this man to come have dinner because it was already midday by that
time.
And the yogis stayed outside. He didn't come inside, but Ratna Lingpa gave him, you know, saba, ch
ang, tea, and meat and cheese.
And that man gave Ratna Lingpa many instructions about, you know, what was written on the scroll
for telling his terminal revelations.
Then it was getting late. Ratna Lingpa said, "Oh, it's getting late, and you don't have hardly any
dress on. Take my chuba, my new chuba, and you can stay here for the night because there's no
village anywhere near here."
And the old man said, "No, I'm fine. Where I'm going, I won't need this." Anyway, so the yogi, he
left, and after a little bit the yogi told Ratna Lingpa,
"You should remember the advice well that I gave you, and remember that and practice that about,
you know, how you engage with those terminal revelations.
And maintain creative emotion, always creative Guru Pama Sambhava." Then he gave some indication,
like, through hints that he was Guru Pama Sambhava through different ways, but he didn't come out
and say it straight away.
Then he pulled a small horn from his chuba, blew that in different directions, and then he just
disappeared like that.
Ratna Lingpa was so amazed. He thought, "Oh, that scroll must have disappeared that he gave me, too
." So he ran inside, looked, but the scroll was still there.
Anyway, then ever since that happened, Ratna Lingpa, he felt so joyful devotion. His mind always
kind of stayed in the natural state, and he had this whole radiance and the whole vibration of even
his house had completely changed.
So that when his wife came home, she asked, "You look so white. You even look so shining, you know,
what happened? What happened?"
And he said, he didn't really tell her because he'd been instructed not to reveal that for three
years to tell, keep secret their meaning in that scroll.
But she kept asking, asking, so over time he said, "Here's what happened." And he was so happy, and
so they both kept that secret for three years.
And then after three years when Ratna Lingpa, I guess, was about 27, he began to discover termless
in many places.
So the point being that Guru Padmasambhava can appear in many different forms, even as a little old
man wearing yellow cotton cloth.
If we go to the point, first point, which is page 97, the first paragraph.
"Sometimes when students are learning to visualize, they find it difficult to maintain the
visualization.
Since the meditation deities are displays of primordial wisdom, their images are not solid objects.
For instance, Guru Padmasambhava manifests in many different ways. His form and color are not
definite.
Sometimes Guru Padmasambhava might transform into a small bird who is singing outside your window.
Sometimes he appears, and sometimes he disappears.
When his body of primordial wisdom disappears, you should not worry about that you have lost touch
with him.
Continue your meditation so that Guru Padmasambhava will come back again and again and become more
clear."
So one thing that this reminds me of is that Kimbell is talking about how even if the visualization
isn't clear,
that if you really keep that sense of the presence of Padmasambhava or whoever it is that you're
visualizing,
and just keep that kind of heart connection with even just the essence of what the Buddha is, then
that's good.
And then as he's saying here too, to keep trying, to keep trying to visualize.
There was one time when Lorraine and I were doing Chenrezig prayers together.
There was only one thing she said, like we were in the middle of the silence.
She must have noticed I wasn't meditating very hard, because she told me, "Feel the presence of the
lineage.
Feel that presence and then you're right back to meditation."
That's very striking, I think particularly at the time.
It's amazing how particularly those small bits of pith advice, they snowball.
You kind of lose track of where the blessings really go to and what they make more profound.
I have a question in terms of just even, I'm someone who's always had a lot of trouble with
visualization,
and my visualization still is not really very clear.
I do rely on that presence and the essence of what the deity is about, tuning into that and trying
to be that.
I just wonder, what is the advice if you're someone who has a lot of trouble having a clear
visualization?
What are the steps? What does one do?
Well, definitely what you said is, Rinpoche's voice said, that's really important.
Which of course includes our Boichita, our joy and devotion and all those kind of foundations of
the practice.
And then maybe even within the visualization instruction, if you can even just focus on one part of
it,
like just on Guru Pichay's smile or just on Guru Pichay's eyes or anything.
That's definitely kind of something.
I think too, part of that part of feeling the closeness is also in a way just like, it's like
feeling that presence and closeness.
And I don't know if it's that way for everyone, but it definitely seems like it just kind of opens
up.
It's like we relax and sometimes almost by relaxing a little more.
And that kind of that feel, especially that closeness feeling in a way, the visualization can
happen a little easier in a way.
And then of course, there's also so many wonderful tankas and things like that.
Those can definitely be used as a support for that.
And sometimes just by gazing on the tanka and doing the meditation and knowing with these same kind
of instructions
that it's not a fixed substantially existing, but that is Guru Padma Sambha.
And the same too with our visualization, maybe what are we expecting?
You know what I mean? What are we expecting to see when we close our eyes and visualize?
I mean, we know, but also that part of keeping that constancy and following the instructions as
best we can.
Seems Guru Pichay's always emphasized and with that closeness feeling, but also not getting too
relaxed or too caught up on what we're not doing.
But that's what it seems like. And I'm sure there's other...
Yeah, that's good. Yeah, it's really helpful.
Kind of going off what you were saying too with the tanka, I mean, I don't know if I consider this
advice as much as anecdotal.
I noticed particularly when I started making soft-saws that my visualization really started to crit
ter.
Actually, sometimes the making of them, because I have to really inspect the detail of them through
bubbles.
But also then when I had to start painting them, you know, because then I mean, particularly if it
's a complex look.
Oh yeah, I mean, because some of them, you know, you're bringing out the eyes.
There was one morning I spent four hours on one chin racing and every detail you're trying to
really get it to pop and shine.
It was amazing because then, you know, you go to meditate later that day and you close your eyes
and boom, didn't have to work at it.
Because you just spent four hours like burning it into your retina.
So, you know, those kind of practices too, where you're in a situation where you really have to
inspect, you know, things like that.
Which I'm not sure everyone's going to have the opportunity to make a sasa, though it's wonderful.
But, you know, any kind of way to really connect to really having or even I mean, I guess in that
sense, even just inspecting that really noticing all the really intricate detail and really just
really going over it.
You know that real attention to those depictions was really helpful for me.
Even in this, I guess, it's more advice that Guru Pama Sambala gave on visualization stage and this
really amazing book, "Deity, Mantra, and Wisdom."
It has three fundamental ningma texts by J.B. A. Lingpa, Pacha Rinpoche, and Getze Maha Pandita.
But anyway, in the back of that, there's some appendix and it has Guru Rinpoche's short, you know,
two pages of advice on visualization.
And that he says, for example, he says, "Look at the image continuously for a long length of time."
Just kind of like what you said.
I mean, it's a specific instruction and it must be applied and you have to receive the instruction
from the teacher.
But then he said, "Then close your eyes and immediately visualize that image or visualize yourself
as that image."
And he said, "Don't keep, if your visualization isn't more clear and it becomes dull, then don't
meditate like that.
Then relax, open your eyes again and again, look at the image."
Over and he just kind of repeated this and he said, "Do this for like three days."
He said, "Do this over and over, continually doing this and interspersing with relaxation."
And when you just let go of the visualization altogether.
But feeling that that presence, it's beautiful. I mean, if we had time, I think part of that too is
really just shamatha.
You know, like developing some concentration, a little bit more mental quietude.
And then from that basis, engaging in the practice and then alternating like that too.
I mean, it depends on the proof of instructions like of Guru Rinpoche's or what practice you're
doing.
That was his essential advice for meditation.
- Part of it. - Uh-huh, yeah.
Yeah, I particularly tune into what Maya was saying about just looking at one detail.
Because I think that might be part of what makes it hard for me is I'm trying to do a whole lot of
detail at once.
You know, without actually, and I've heard that instruction or read that instruction too.
To start with the eyes, the eyelashes and the eyebrows and then add the nose.
Do you know what I mean? That you kind of really build it up by pieces.
And so then, you know, it's not like all of a sudden trying to do something totally complex.
It's just like, I mean, to me, even one figure, do you know what I mean, can be complex in terms of
...
Because there's that... Tennessee was so materialistic to think, well, it's not really there.
At least I'm that way. I'm very kind of specific type, you know?
So it's like, it's not really there and some, you know, it's all vague and stuff, et cetera.
Yeah.
I'm trying to think how I would apply it to the visualization too.
I just remember particularly when I was getting trained in how to be able to hear a musical line a
few times
and be able to kind of regurgitate it.
One of the things that my teacher used to tell me, he would teach us how to memorize very quickly.
And one of the things he used to teach was, he called it chunking, where you essentially, you take
something,
you start breaking it down into its component parts, but you start to recognize the pattern of it.
So, you know, like, he would take 10 intervals, you know, we'd have to memorize the 10.
He said, think of it in three parts, a three unit, a three unit, and a four unit.
It's the same way like a phone number is broken up. You have the blah, blah, blah, dash, blah, blah
, dash, blah, blah, blah, blah.
You know, kind of a thing.
So I guess for some visualizations, particularly I think kind of going back to that, you know,
you have certain details you focus on, you know, and then you kind of like, okay, now I can kind of
pull those together.
Okay, now let me like look over here and let me, you know, get these together.
Okay, now I've got that, you know, kind of thing too.
I don't know. I mean, I guess like Andrew was saying before, it's, you know,
it comes down to what are the instructions that were given to the different particular students,
but just more method.
I'm doing great. I mean, there's one thing that struck me related to this visualization stage
practice.
And I wrote it down and like it's really helped me for a lot, just even just to remember kind of
the some main points.
And it's related to this video that I've come around the chase that's mentioned at the end of this
study.
I mean, it was in the union of Mahamudra and Zochen and Kamaramache said, and I just have it
written down,
with Vashara pride and purity, while feeling the presence of all the Buddhas,
we will get the full result of the visualization practice, even if the visualization is not perfect
.
So again, it's with Vashara pride and purity, while feeling the presence of all the Buddhas, we
will get the full result.
So then here, I think it lists these three parts that are mentioned in Kamaramache's teaching in
that video.
And they're the same things we're talking about now.
And the first is this clarity part, where it is detailed as it can be the visualization.
And if it's not that detailed, it'll grow as we keep practicing.
But the main point, like Ann said, is to feel the presence of there is an actual Buddha there.
They're so happy you're trying to develop these qualities, but to really feel, to let yourself be,
this is really real.
This is happening, you know.
And then the second point was the purity of the Dapha in Tibetan.
And Kamaramache said that was like seeing the purity of the compassion, the purity of the wisdom,
and the purity that's beyond duality.
So since some, I think in Kamaramache's, the first great Kamaramache said the emptiness aspect of
the visualization,
or here, like in the chapter of Kamaramache, they're saying that it's not solid, it's not fixed, it
's totally transcendental wisdom, rainbow light.
So to really feel it's there, but it's not there in any fixed structured way, it's totally flexible
, it's just luminous awareness, or this emptiness.
So we have like the detail, like something really there, but it's empty.
And then the third part is to like stably be with it.
So the third part is this stability, or tanka, I think, I remember what she said.
So it has to do with the shamatha, or the concentration, and also this Vajrapad component.
Like to be with it, and to be really convinced with it, to really fully settle into that, like the
Vajrapad, this is actually the true nature, this isn't pretending or something.
So and then, Rinpoche in one sentence included those three points, which is beautiful, with Vajrap
ad and purity, while feeling the presence of all the Buddhas, we'll get the full result.
It's really beautiful, that's the emptiness part, it has the shamatha part, because we're
sustaining it as practice, and then we're really believing it, feeling it, like really being there
with it.
That's very profound, those three points.
Because I think, like we've all been saying, I think the big obstacle that we face is, I can't do
it well, you know? Like I can't visualize well.
So if we don't have the details, just like you're saying, you know?
Even without that part, if we really feel the presence, like you said, and just also the two other
parts, Rinpoche said, if the visualization's not clear, as long as we're really trying to connect
with the emptiness, where's this coming from?
It's not, you know, this is all mine.
And then secondly, the like to really stay with that, with confidence, then gradually, like the
clarity, the detail will fill out, and the practice, the mind will sharpen those qualities, clarity
will come more and more strongly and clearly.
I thought it's interesting too, how in this chapter, of course there's Rinpoche's have given so
many instructions on visualization and things, but in this particular chapter, it seems like the
emphasis is really on not, in a way, like not, like he talks about the little bird at your window.
That can be Rinpoche, and it's like, that's not what you're trying to visualize. It's not even so
much, a lot of the chapter doesn't even talk about formal practice so much.
Just in that sense of how, maybe the way we, you know, the room we're sitting in, and the world
that it is just like, our body as it is, like, even if we're not seeing it as like, you know, how
it might be described in the text, or seeing Rinpoche as,
you know, as described in the text, but just that aspect of settling into the practice where, just
knowing, and just, just like we know our heart is beating or something, you know, like, this is my
body, you know, this is Rinpoche, even if, just feeling that, that, that, that part of the presence
, how it's like, everything that's appearing is kind of like, this pure land, even if it's, it's,
you know,
we're not going to put any rules and regulations on how it's supposed to look, or sound, or smell,
or taste, or, you know, or, I mean, all those, like, that, that aspect of the practice.
And, and also like, here, where Rautna Linkpa wakes up, and there's, you know, this man who has so
much to offer, you know what I mean? And, and he recognizes maybe later, Oh, that was Pabong Samb
aba, or that, you know, but that, but, but still he, he, he got a lot out of that, you know, he didn
't miss any kind of opportunity because, oh, it's just some old man, you know, something like that.
But, I mean, he took full, he really engaged, like, with what he was doing. I know that was just
like, I just thought that was an interesting part, as far as this, what's in the book, under this
title, you know, that it seems like it's that, like, we've been talking, and I think it's
definitely interesting.
We talked more about, like, the, you know, different kinds of samadhi and concentration and the
little points we've talked about, but I just thought it was really kind of interesting, like, that
level kind of underneath all that stuff seems to be, Orimpa Shays are kind of trying to give it a
sense of that, you know, they're not making a disconnect between what's appearing to us and what we
're meditating on in a way, I mean, without, you know,
you know, that's great. It's like the little bird at the window. You think, oh, I'm distracted.
Yeah, but you know, I mean, not saying, yeah, that everything's included.
I think it really reminds me of that instruction. Sometimes people will say, such and such thing
happened to me. How should I, is this a good sign or a bad sign? And then Orimpa Shays said so many
times, if you're in a retreat environment, or if you're just really connecting to your practice,
you take everything as being a good sign.
Everything is an indication to go back to your practice, to keep going, keep going, keep going. So
it's not like a little bird, if it becomes a reminder of connecting to your nature and really
inspiring this genuine bodhicitta and this sense of like the fresh, joyful awareness and like then
all these relative things,
all these changing things, if we can use them, whether they're difficult or not, to help us come
practice, to help us remind us of what the whole, our trajectory, the path and like the point of
the path, then it's beautiful.
I think it's so hard to do. I mean, it's just, maybe for other people, it's not, for me, it's hard
to bring everything onto the path, you know, like that's really hard.
It was an instruction I remember reading early on. It was not here, but before here, that you like,
it might have been Thich Nhat Hanh, where he was, he was talking, but though he was talking about
like introducing it very slowly, like, you know, when you hear like a telephone ring, you just, you
habituate yourself to like every time you hear a telephone ring that you take that moment, stop,
take three breaths, or I mean, in the case of telephone, sometimes we only have one or two breaths
tonight.
But you know, in that same time, you know, it's, you use, you use that, that audio kind of signal
to, you know, stop, breathe, oh, I'm here, hi, you know, kind of.
So I think, you know, if you, if you slowly add in those things, when you just, you use that as
that reminder to even just stop, you know, it's, yeah, because I think it'd be really hard to, you
know, particularly jump right into it and just, you know, feel it's particularly joyful about, you
know, hearing a phone ring.
I know, I don't feel very joyful about hearing phone rings.
But, you know, it's sometimes you just even I remember I used to make a big point of that part,
particularly because there used to be a lot of phones ringing, you know, stop, you know, it's much
nicer.
And then of course, then you can build it up to to where else you need it to be.
You can even add more things here a toaster pop, you should breathe a lot more time with a toaster.
And it seems like, well, along those lines too, sometimes I can say he says something interesting.
He said you should change those frequently, because once your mind gets used to that, it just
becomes same old, same old, and you kind of forget what the door opening means.
So continually switch it up so that your mind doesn't just routinely, normally go through its
normal thing. But I found to like, one of the, how the foundation like what we were talking about,
like how Rinpoche is safe at the beginning of every teaching, which we've heard so many times,
which is the motivation being in the right place, you know, like bodhicitta.
And, you know, the two motivations, the bodhicitta and the skillful means of the Vajrayana, you
know, the three Vajra states being like indispensable tools that really will aid our visualization
practice, not only at the devotional level, which is the central key of all the practice in Vajray
ana, but even the level of clarity and visualization itself.
I remember the first, I think it was the first question I ever asked Rinpoche's during a teaching,
and they were saying, visualize all sentient beings in front of all sentient beings in the tree,
and I was like, what are you talking about?
I asked them that. I asked them that. I was like, Rinpoche's, you started by saying, visualize all
sentient beings, and they just start laughing. They're like, they said, of course, it might be
difficult at first to visualize all sentient beings, but they're like, this is a Mahayana we're
practicing.
Mahayana means great vehicle. That means we include all sentient beings, at least in the mental
level, and realize while you're practicing engaging in the visualization, you should really
consciously include every single sentient being.
So even if you don't visualize all done immediately, but by including them, you will, your capacity
to hold that will become more and more, and it will come more clear over time.
But anyway, just to come back to that essential point that whatever technique we're using, if that
's our motivation, it will work, you know, it will work.
And that's what Rinpoche say over and over again. I've heard them say so many times.
It's funny you mentioned that too, particularly looking back over that first topic point, because I
remember I was sitting and meditating this morning and I was trying to try or a lot to try to
expand that visualization.
And finally, remember to include the squirrels outside that kept eating that darn bird seed we kept
putting out there so tricky, and they just get in there, throw the stuff so it's very hard to
include them and feel compassion but I finally remember it this morning, because they're right
there.
They're making a ruckus for sure. So then, you know, it's, it's good to not feel closed off just
because they're eating all the bird seed.
And I think as all like everyone's saying and what why you seem to really be emphasizing is that, I
mean, this is also, this visualization practices is, it's within the Vafriana view.
And in that view, at least according to the teachings, we're not like refusing our experience.
We're not only trying to consider certain times or certain states or certain experiences as being
that's my practice or that's going to be okay or that's an actually a blessing and everything else
isn't like we're trying to have that, like you said the second
dimension of those three vajra states where it's, it's all flexible and it comes down to it at all
our experiences all our thoughts and racing emotions like it.
Essentially, they're not our enemies. They're not these things we have to punish or get rid of or
just blindly obey, like, we need to learn how to more flexibly engage with them because there's
always that arising aspect of awareness
of our experience, whether it's going to be a nice thing that we like or a difficult thing that we
don't, it's always we're always going to be moving.
And so I say that not because I can do that but just it's that contracting against things is more
or less the root cause of this suffering that we experience like something happens, we contract, we
suffer, like, as opposed to something happening
and we try to open and be aware and clear and receptive doesn't mean we have to gobble it up or
praise it or just to be present with it.
And I think this is such a key vajriana point and I can't I can't do it but I know that's the
teaching is to really be with what's happening. And in terms of visualization like really, it means
incorporating the relative and not
incorporating the relative part too because it's I mean the relative isn't just, of course, there's
all definitely, particularly when we're going through Mahayana and distinguishing how you know
there's a difference, but at the same time that that absolutely still includes the relative, you
know,
so if you're throwing out the relative, guess what else you're throwing out, you know.
And this whole book, I mean, of course it just flows together so beautifully.
In a way, it also kind of seems like this advice on visualization. It almost seems like it's an
extension of the guru yoga practice is that kind of maybe goes over more, goes more over the actual
instruction.
And then of course, and then there's the whole story. But I mean, every single chapter of the book
all relates with the next one or the first one.
You want to read the second point real quick and then I mean it's really re emphasizing what we've
already talked about.
That's good. Yeah, I was gonna say this actually comes directly from the story.
So if I remember correctly in the story this comes after they've, they've met and I think they're,
they're walking now. So they began walking and after a few steps the yogi stopped and said, you
must remember all the advice I had given you, you must have constant
pure devotion and continue to pray to Guru Padmasambhava. Always follow the instructions I gave you
today.
Then he gave a few hints to show that he was Guru Padmasambhava. He did not say, I am Padmasambhava
, but he gave some hints. Then he pulled a small horn from his chuba, blew it in the different
directions.
The moment he did that he disappeared. When Ratna Lingpa saw that the yogi had disappeared, he
thought that maybe the yogi was a magician and that the rolled paper he had placed on his shrine
would be gone.
He ran inside the check and saw that the paper was still there. After his meeting with the yogi,
Ratna Lingpa's whole demeanor and outlook changed. He was always very happy and his mind remained
in the natural state.
Page 100, last paragraph. Page 101, first and second paragraphs.
I thought a big, a big point with this chapter in general and this paragraph too is that it's about
kind of loosening up how convinced we are of our version of what's happening.
I mean, obviously, Ratna Lingpa, of course, is a great turtan and so he's so flexible in such
realization, but all of how he's experiencing in the story is like he's so available for it.
Like he's so kind. He really wants to support this person. He hasn't met. He doesn't really
understand how could he be happening, but he like goes with it.
You know, and it's just how he's so fluid with what's happening. And then it seems like with
visualization too, it's really helping us to try to really become more fluid, like we're not so
convinced of our limited idea of what it is.
And all this visualization and deities are all this makeup, this mythic something that really is
not it's all just make believe and that's kind of, you know, there's like that general idea of that
.
The magic and mystery is like for kids or for ancient times, and it's not really the real
instruction or something.
But I think it's really... Mervice has emphasized so much and it's just at the center of the Vajray
ana that the nature is totally mysterious.
Like the more, the closer we get to it, the closer we are with our experience, the more flexible it
is. I mean, the more we can't pin it down.
And then, I mean, here he just blows the horn and disappears and it's just all of it. It's just so
incredible.
And we could easily dismiss it and be comfortable with what we already believe.
I mean, along those exact same notes, like Grandpa Chase has said so many times, like when the time
for doubt and investigation and analysis and exploration is when you're not on the cushion
practicing, when you're engaged consciously with that study and contemplation.
When it comes to the meditation itself and the visualization, you drop that completely.
Don't engage in that aspect of the practice. Just have, like Drago was emphasizing too, that about
your confidence, you know, that for the whole rest of your life, okay, maybe this is just whatever,
a game.
But now we're not playing a game, you know. You're engaging with the display of your own true
nature.
That's what the whole aspect of the visualization is, you know. Your own mind.
You're working with your own mind's flexibility. Do the blessings of the lineage and the devotion
in your meeting with all those circumstances.
So, anyway, that's a really, and that I think does take a lot of practice for some people,
including myself, you know, to be able to just let it go a little bit.
You're practicing just like, you know, when that comes up, just not now.
You know, I'm not, that's not what I'm doing now, you know. Come back to just, otherwise it's just
like, you're tearing down your practice.
You're tearing down your practice and you're tearing down your ability to really, you know, have
that confidence.
Sorry, sorry if this seems a little off topic for you. I just, I keep rereading these last two
lines in that second point.
It's just something really striking about it, and maybe it's because I'm doing a little bit of a
word substitution here.
But, so it says the yogi, but I keep reading Padmasambhava.
So after his meeting with Padmasambhava, Ratna Linkpa's whole demeanor and outlook changed.
He was always very happy, and his mind remained in the natural state.
And I guess I keep kind of, particularly, you know, the conversations we have about Padmasambhava
and, you know, that flexibility,
but also how, you know, nature of your mind and, you know, that all those different ways that Ratna
Linkpa really talked about,
not only the flexibility, but all the different levels of meaning of Padmasambhava.
And just, you know, so those two sentences really just kind of seems to spark when you really kind
of play with the flexibility in that word, you know, in that title.
And also, you know, it seems to keep tying back to, again, what Ann really started the conversation
with, talking about that essence and feeling that presence.
I just thought those two lines are so beautiful.
And here, like Lya said, Padmasambhava is the root guru of Tibetan Buddhism. They always say that,
you know. So it's like, he's, it's like when you meet the guru, you know,
and you're open with that flexibility, like Drago was saying, you go with that, you're meeting the
natural state that's just taking form as a human or an old man or a woman or whatever, you know.
So reading it that way, like you were saying, Lojo, it's like when you meet the mind of the guru
embodied in a form, and like he said, follow those instructions of that what I said, you know.
And then he felt so joyful, had so much devotion, all the circumstance come together beautifully if
he would have been like, oh, you're not, you know, who are you?
He discovered so many of these profound terms.
[singing]